_episodes/06-sharing.md, before:

---
layout: episode
title: Sharing notebooks
teaching: 10
exercises: 0
questions:
 - How can I share notebooks with colleagues and the community?
objectives:
 - See what platforms and services exist to share Jupyter notebooks
 - Have a final discussion on notebooks in research.
---

## Sharing notebooks

- You can enter a URL, GitHub repo or username, or GIST ID in [`nbviewer`](https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/) and view a rendered Jupyter notebook
- Read the Docs can render Jupyter Notebooks via the [nbsphinx package](https://nbsphinx.readthedocs.io/)
- [Binder](https://mybinder.org/) creates live notebooks based on a GitHub repository
- [CoCalc](https://cocalc.com/) (formerly SageMathCloud) allows collaborative editing of notebooks in the cloud 
- Google's [colaboratory](https://colab.research.google.com/) lets you work on notebooks in the cloud, and you can [read and write to notebook files on Drive](https://colab.research.google.com/notebooks/io.ipynb)
- [Microsoft Azure Notebooks](https://notebooks.azure.com/) also offers free notebooks in the cloud
- [JupyterLab](https://github.com/jupyterlab/jupyterlab) supports sharing and collaborative editing of notebooks via Google Drive 
- [Notedown](https://github.com/aaren/notedown), [Jupinx](https://github.com/QuantEcon/sphinxcontrib-jupyter) and [DocOnce](https://github.com/hplgit/doconce) can take Markdown or Sphinx files and generate Jupyter Notebooks
- The `jupyter nbconvert` tool can convert a (`.ipynb`) notebook file to:
    - python code (`.py` file) 
    - an HTML file
    - a LaTeX file
    - a PDF file
    - a slide-show in the browser

Note: the Google, Microsoft and CoCalc platforms are free but have paid subscriptions for faster access to cloud resources


## Final discussion

- If you are already using Jupyter, what tasks do you use it for? 
- If you are new to Jupyter, do you see any possible use cases?
- Do you think Jupyter Notebooks can help tackle the problem of irreproducible results?


But Notebooks have some [pitfalls](https://scicomp.aalto.fi/scicomp/jupyter-pitfalls.html)

- They **don't promote modularity**, and once you get started in a
  notebook it can be hard to migrate to modules.
- They are **difficult to test**.  There are things to run notebooks as
  unit tests like [nbval](https://nbval.readthedocs.io/), but it's not
  perfect.
- Notebooks can be **version controlled**
  ([nbdime](https://nbdime.readthedocs.io/) helps with that), but
  there are **still limitations**.
- You can **change code after you run it** and run code out of order.
  This can make debugging hard and results irreproducible if you
  aren't careful.
- Notebooks **aren't named by default** and tend to **acquire a bunch of
  unrelated stuff**.  Be careful with organization!
- Once lots of code is in notebooks, it can be **hard to change to
  proper programs that can be scripted**.

Commit message:

add mybinder exercise to last episode

_episodes/06-sharing.md, after:

---
layout: episode
title: Sharing notebooks
teaching: 10
exercises: 0
questions:
 - How can I share notebooks with colleagues and the community?
objectives:
 - See what platforms and services exist to share Jupyter notebooks
 - Have a final discussion on notebooks in research.
---

## Sharing notebooks

- You can enter a URL, GitHub repo or username, or GIST ID in [`nbviewer`](https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/) and view a rendered Jupyter notebook
- Read the Docs can render Jupyter Notebooks via the [nbsphinx package](https://nbsphinx.readthedocs.io/)
- [Binder](https://mybinder.org/) creates live notebooks based on a GitHub repository
- [CoCalc](https://cocalc.com/) (formerly SageMathCloud) allows collaborative editing of notebooks in the cloud 
- Google's [colaboratory](https://colab.research.google.com/) lets you work on notebooks in the cloud, and you can [read and write to notebook files on Drive](https://colab.research.google.com/notebooks/io.ipynb)
- [Microsoft Azure Notebooks](https://notebooks.azure.com/) also offers free notebooks in the cloud
- [JupyterLab](https://github.com/jupyterlab/jupyterlab) supports sharing and collaborative editing of notebooks via Google Drive 
- [Notedown](https://github.com/aaren/notedown), [Jupinx](https://github.com/QuantEcon/sphinxcontrib-jupyter) and [DocOnce](https://github.com/hplgit/doconce) can take Markdown or Sphinx files and generate Jupyter Notebooks
- The `jupyter nbconvert` tool can convert a (`.ipynb`) notebook file to:
    - python code (`.py` file) 
    - an HTML file
    - a LaTeX file
    - a PDF file
    - a slide-show in the browser

Note: the Google, Microsoft and CoCalc platforms are free but have paid subscriptions for faster access to cloud resources

> ## Making your notebooks reproducible by anyone via mybinder
> 
> - Create a `requirements.txt` file in your notebook repository, e.g.
>   ```
>   ipywidgets==7.4.2
>   numpy==1.16.4
>   matplotlib==3.1.0
>   ```
> - Commit and push
> - Visit [https://mybinder.org/](https://mybinder.org/), and paste in 
>   the URL of your notebook repository
> - Click on the arrow next to the "Cope the text below..." to expand it
> - Copy the markdown line which begins with `[![Binder](https://mybinder.org/badge_logo.svg)]`, and paste it into a README.md file for your 
>   notebook repository. Commit and push it. 
> - Check that your notebook repository now has a "launch binder" 
>   button in your README file on GitHub
> - Try clicking the button and see how your repository in launched 
>   on mybinder. Your notebooks can now be expored and executed in the cloud.
> - Enjoy being fully reproducible!
{: .task}


## Final discussion

- If you are already using Jupyter, what tasks do you use it for? 
- If you are new to Jupyter, do you see any possible use cases?
- Do you think Jupyter Notebooks can help tackle the problem of irreproducible results?


But Notebooks have some [pitfalls](https://scicomp.aalto.fi/scicomp/jupyter-pitfalls.html)

- They **don't promote modularity**, and once you get started in a
  notebook it can be hard to migrate to modules.
- They are **difficult to test**.  There are things to run notebooks as
  unit tests like [nbval](https://nbval.readthedocs.io/), but it's not
  perfect.
- Notebooks can be **version controlled**
  ([nbdime](https://nbdime.readthedocs.io/) helps with that), but
  there are **still limitations**.
- You can **change code after you run it** and run code out of order.
  This can make debugging hard and results irreproducible if you
  aren't careful.
- Notebooks **aren't named by default** and tend to **acquire a bunch of
  unrelated stuff**.  Be careful with organization!
- Once lots of code is in notebooks, it can be **hard to change to
  proper programs that can be scripted**.
