content/index.rst, before:

Jupyter notebooks - A tool to write and share executable notebooks and data visualization
=========================================================================================

The goal of this lesson is to teach learners the user interface of JupyterLab,
how Jupyter notebooks work, and what some common and powerful use cases are.

For many learners, notebooks are not a new concept,
and our goal will be to demonstrate and discuss and guide towards good practices
for **reproducibility, collaboration, and reusability**.


.. prereq::

  - A reasonably recent version of Jupyter and JupyterLab, which is installed
    as part of the
    `Conda environment for CodeRefinery workshops <https://coderefinery.github.io/installation/conda-environment/>`__.
  - Optional (we only demonstrate this):
    A reasonably recent version of Git to be able to work with the JupyterLab Git integration.



.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Core episodes

   motivation
   interface
   first-notebook
   version-control
   sharing
   summary

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Optional episodes

   extra-features
   examples

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Reference

   exercises
   guide
   license


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: About

   All lessons <https://coderefinery.org/lessons/core/>
   CodeRefinery <https://coderefinery.org/>
   Reusing <https://coderefinery.org/lessons/reusing/>

Commit message:

link to shell crash course

content/index.rst, after:

Jupyter notebooks - A tool to write and share executable notebooks and data visualization
=========================================================================================

The goal of this lesson is to teach learners the user interface of JupyterLab,
how Jupyter notebooks work, and what some common and powerful use cases are.

For many learners, notebooks are not a new concept,
and our goal will be to demonstrate and discuss and guide towards good practices
for **reproducibility, collaboration, and reusability**.


.. prereq::

  - A reasonably recent version of Jupyter and JupyterLab, which is installed
    as part of the
    `Conda environment for CodeRefinery workshops <https://coderefinery.github.io/installation/conda-environment/>`__.
  - Optional (we only demonstrate this):
    A reasonably recent version of Git to be able to work with the JupyterLab Git integration.
  - If you wish to follow in the terminal and are new to the command line, we
    recorded a `short shell crash course <https://youtu.be/xbTTDLA3txI>`__.



.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Core episodes

   motivation
   interface
   first-notebook
   version-control
   sharing
   summary

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Optional episodes

   extra-features
   examples

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Reference

   Shell crash course <https://youtu.be/xbTTDLA3txI>
   exercises
   guide
   license


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: About

   All lessons <https://coderefinery.org/lessons/core/>
   CodeRefinery <https://coderefinery.org/>
   Reusing <https://coderefinery.org/lessons/reusing/>
